One of the synchronization techniques is called exclusive lock.

The basic syntax of the exclusive lock is basically just saying lock and then parenthesis.

So within the parenthesis is a lock object we're going to talk about when we jump into Visual Studio.

And then you use curly braces to surround the critical section we call the everything within the curly

braces the body of the lock.

So everything that is within the body of the lock is usually the critical section.

And when you apply the lock this way, the body of the lock can only be executed by maximum one thread.

No other thread will be able to access the code within the body of the lock, while a lock is being

held by another thread, so this essentially makes the operations within the body of the lock atomic,

although they are divisible, but it's as if they are atomic just because they can only be executed

by one thread.

So let's jump into Visual Studio and see it in action.

So in order to apply the lock, first we need to have a lock object.

I'm using donor eight in dotnet nine.

Things is slightly different, but in.

Net eight or previous versions which is C-sharp 12 including C-sharp 12 which you can do is you can

just declare an object like this and you're going to say counter lock.

And you can just say new object like this.

Now this can be used to lock a critical section like this.

So now let's go to the critical section right here.

And then we can say lock.

And then we apply that to the counter lock.

And we use curly braces to specify which is the critical section to be included in the body.

And it's just like this.

It's very simple.

Now when we do this, the this code can only be executed by one thread.

It's not possible that both threads are executing this right And it's going to avoid the problem that

we had before.

All right.

So let's run this and see what happens.

All right.

Now you can see that the final counter value is 200,000.

Now, if I run it again, it's going to be the same thing.

See, every single time it's going to be 300,000.

And that's just because we applied the exclusive lock.

And it's as if this line becomes a atomic operation, although it's not.

We are using the lock to make it behave like atomic operation.

Now, one more thing I want to mention is that the lock has within itself a try catch mechanism.

Try catch and finally mechanism.

That means that you don't have to worry about what if inside here, because this is just one one line

of code in real world project.

You may have complicated operations within the body of the lock.

And what if it throws exception?

You may worry that if it throws exception and the lock is not released, then other threads won't be

able to get the lock and everything is blocked.

You don't actually have to worry about that because within the lock there is a try and finally mechanism

there.

So inside the finally section there, the lock is always released.

You don't have to worry about releasing the lock when you use the lock keyword.

And another thing, as I mentioned in C sharp 13, which comes with 9.9 and is still in preview at this

moment, I haven't installed it yet, but in there, what's recommended is that instead of using an

object, you use a system dot threading dot lock.

I think it's called dot.

As you can see that it's not actually available in my version because I'm using C sharp 12.

So I have to do I think it would be look like something looked like this in C sharp 13.

So I have to do what is recommended by the previous versions.

So I'm just using a object here.

Um this can be a any reference type.

It doesn't have to be object.

And the best practice is to use a dedicated lock that has only one purpose, which is to protect the

critical section here.

And I think that's everything I want to cover in this video.

You have any questions, please let me know.

If not, I will see you in the next one.