In this video we're going to talk about mutex.

Mutex is another thread synchronization mechanism that is used to help us to protect a critical section.

It's very similar to a lock or a monitor that we're going to create some sort of lock around the critical

section in order to protect it.

But usually we don't call it a lock, we just call it mutex.

And its syntax is very, very similar to a monitor and looks something like this.

So first we create a mutex.

It's a little bit confusing here by creating the mutex we don't actually have ownership of the mutex

yet.

So in order to have ownership mutex we're going to use mutex dot wait one.

Once we have the ownership the thread is going to proceed into critical section over here.

And after that we don't forget to release the mutex.

So very similar to monitor and monitor we enter the critical section and then we exit.

Here we use wait one to acquire the mutex, and then we enter into the critical section.

And then here we release the mutex.

So some other thread can acquire the mutex.

So you may ask if we already have monitor and works very very similar to monitor why we need mutex.

Well one of the distinct features of mutex is that it can not only be used within the process, it can

be also used across processes.

And for that we need to cover some basic concept of process in case that you don't know about it.

Because at the very beginning of this course I mentioned that we have this diagram here, we have application

and then we have threads.

So I was using the rectangle to represent a application.

And I was using the little circles to represent different threads here.

So I was omitting on purpose another layer in between, which is process.

So let me make that clear in this video.

So first of all we have something called application.

And then within the application we can have different processes.

For example this application have two different processes.

And then each process can have one or multiple threads.

So in this example the first process only has the main thread.

And the second process have actually two different threads.

So there's three different layers app process and threads.

But in terms of learning about multi threading it's not very important to know about that.

There could be possibility of different processes except in this particular lesson why we could have

different processes within one application.

Well let's look at this task manager for now.

So task manager if I order by name I can see different locations at the top.

And then if you see, for example this, there is a bracket and there's three in it.

This means this application has three different processes.

And then for outlook there's so many.

And then for Microsoft Edge you can see that we have 16 different processes.

And the reason why we need different processes there are different reasons.

One of them is to improve the performance.

For example for this browser modern browsers, each tab could have its own process and then each extension

has its own process.

So from an architecture point of view this is going to be better separation of concerns.

And from performance point of view this could be allowing the browser to utilize multiple cores of modern

CPUs more efficiently.

So therefore we have to be able to deal with multiple processes within the same application, right?

And when multiple processes are trying to access the same resource, for example a file, then although

it could potentially increase the performance, it could potentially cause race conditions in the same

way as resources shared within different threads.

But we can't use monitor or lock anymore because those synchronization techniques can be only used within

the same process.

Then we have to use particular type of synchronization technique.

For example, in this case we use mutex.

Because mutex can be used to lock shared resources exclusively across different processes.

However, the syntax is slightly different.

So this syntax is actually used only for local mutex.

You cannot use this mutex across different processes, but if we slightly change it, then it will be

able to.

We will be able to use it across different processes.

And the way to do that is to have the first parameter passing as early as false.

So this is the initial ownership.

We don't need to worry about this for now.

You drag this okay.

And then the second parameter is important.

The second parameter is the name of the mutex.

So you can give it a name.

So when you give the mutex a name this mutex can be shared between different processes.

So for example I can call it global file mutex something like that.

You can give it any name you want and then nothing change over here within the using statement.

Another thing you notice that we're using the using statement.

This using statement is very important because we want to dispose the mutex at the end.

Why we want to dispose the mutex.

because this is a resource within the operating system.

It's like a file.

So you want to dispose it.

You don't want to leave it in the operating system.

And that could lead to potentially memory leak.

Now let's look at some examples.

So let's take a look at our counter example.

So in this synchronization overview example here we are using the increment counter.

I've been using it for many many times.

And we are just basically incrementing the counter variable which is a shared resource.

And we're using two threads to increase it.

And there's always a possibility that they're going to run into race conditions.

So the inconsistent behavior will be the result.

And the counter, although expected to be 200,000 because we're using two threads doing the same thing.

So when one thread finishes it will be 100,002 threads finished.

It's supposed to be 200,000, but if we run this, it's almost always less than 200,000.

You have seen that.

And as soon as we use a log to protect the resource, the result is consistent consistently 200,000.

Now, if we change this to do the same thing in two different processes, of course we cannot use the

memory.

We cannot use this.

This is also always a memory within the process.

So this cannot be be the shared resource.

So we can use a file to store the counter value.

And then when we increment we first read the counter from the file.

And then after we increment we write the value back to the file.

That way the file becomes the counter, the shared resource in each process.

We just need to loop through not 100,000 times, because opening and closing files is taking too much

time.

Maybe we can try 10,000 instead of 100,000.

Okay, so let's give it a try and see what happens this time.

So let's close this solution and try to create a new one.

Again same thing console application.

And we're going to call it mutex uh example.

And maybe making it more specific.

We're going to have global mutex because local mutex is almost the same as monitor dot eight long term

support.

Now delete the default lines here.

So what are we going to do.

We are going to create a file path.

And I'm going to just call it counter dot.

So it's going to be a text file.

Now I'm going to loop through a Index.

For how long?

How many?

10,000 times.

And each time I'm going to get the counter out from the file, I'm going to say read counter, which

is a function I'm going to create later.

So I'll pass in the file path.

Right.

And then now I'm going to increase it.

So this is I'm writing everything without any thread synchronization mechanism.

And we're going to see what happens if I run it.

So then I'm going to call write counter right back to the same file and with the same file file path.

And the counter value has to be in the parameter okay.

Now at the end I'm going to say console dot write line.

And I'm going to say process finished.

And then I'm going to have a console dot read line just so that we don't accidentally go out of this.

Finish this.

Now we can implement the counter Contour and contour.

I don't want to implement it by just writing every single letter.

I have prepared the code already for you and we can go through that when I paste it over here.

All right, so this is not a I o or basic C-sharp course.

That's why I just paste it over here.

So we basically have a read counter and write counter function implemented.

And we have the file stream.

And we are opening.

We allow different processes to open at the same time because file share is written.

Right right.

And then we open the the stream and read the content and then parse the content.

Same over here with writer content we have the file stream and then we create a stream writer.

So this one is stream reader.

This is stream writer.

And then we write the counter value back to the file okay.

So if I run it.

Basically let me build it first.

Remember, the file mode here is open or create.

So if it doesn't exist it's going to create.

If it does exist then it's going to just open an existing file.

So let me go to the File explorer here.

And now let's go to bin debug donate.

Now I have this global mutex example and I don't have the counter dot txt file in the folder yet.

If I run it now it's going to take a while because we're opening and closing the file all the time.

Right.

Closing and opening the file all the time.

Now it's finished.

So it's about 10s it finished and the result is 10,000.

So that's expected.

So now what if I run.

So let me let me delete this first.

What if I run two different instances of the same application which means two processes are running

separately.

And then I open up again you can see that two processes are running and the reading and writing to the

same counter file.

Each one would do it for 10,000 times.

The expected result is 20,000.

Right?

But moment of truth.

Let's open counter file.

You can see it's way less than 20,000.

And why?

Well, it's the same reason that we have seen before within the same within the same process.

Right?

When we have two different threads running, we experience the same the same situation.

Now again, if I delete it and run it again.

So the result would be different, but it will be always less than 200,000.

Let's wait for about 10s, maybe a little bit more than 10s, because we're trying to open the file

and closing the file at the same time.

Okay, the application finish and let's open.

At this time it's even less.

Now, the reason why is because the file itself is a shared resource and accessing the shared resource

from two different processes simultaneously will cause risk conditions and inconsistent behaviors.

Therefore, we need to apply some kind of synchronization mechanism.

Using monitor wouldn't work.

Using lock wouldn't work.

Let's actually try that.

Okay, so let's say I'm going to just use a lock to protect it.

So we're reading and writing.

So all of these should be a critical section.

And let me declare it.

So I'm gonna say file lock object.

Now I'm going to just lock the file okay.

Lock the critical section and let me build it again and go over here.

So I'm going to delete the counter file for now and let me run it and run it again.

Wait for a while.

It's going to be about 10s first one finished, second one finished.

And let's close the processes and go to the counter.

Now you can see that it's still less than 200,000.

This time it's even less.

So let me close this.

That means the lock doesn't work.

And of course, we don't need to try monitor because lock is monitor explained before.

So let me delete this line and let's try to implement mutex.

So let me delete this as well because it doesn't really work.

And I'm going to do a Ctrl CF to format it.

But I'm going to comment it out for now.

So what are we going to do.

We're going to use using statement.

Remember we have to use using statement in order to make sure that it's disposed.

The mutex is always disposed.

And then we're going to go mutex.

And you can see that there's different signatures.

We're going to use the the third one.

But you can rate this initial initially owned.

So if it's true then it gives the calling thread initial ownership.

We don't need initial ownership.

That's why I'm going to use force.

And then the second one is the name of the mutex.

Let's just call it global file mutex.

And in order to make a difference perhaps I'm going to just add the file name here in case some other

people also create a mutex with the same name here because it's going to use across the operating system.

So that's why I need to add the file name here just to make sure it's always unique.

And then within the using body here I'm going to loop.

So I'm going to just copy this and paste it over here and uncomment it.

So I'm going to loop for again 10,000 times.

But remember this is the critical section.

So before we enter the critical section we need to require the mutex.

And then we're going to try over critical section.

So finally we need to release the mutex.

Don't forget to do that.

Otherwise we're going to be in trouble.

All right.

Now we have this mutex protecting us I want to emphasize again as soon as you give the mutex a name

this mutex mutex becomes global across all of the processes.

So this mutex now can protect shared resource across different processes.

And let's give it a try.

Let's first build the solution.

And now go to the folder.

Delete the counter again.

And let's run the application twice.

All right.

So we have two processes running at the same time.

And let's wait and see what's going to happen.

It's going to take a while again and thank you for waiting.

But it's going to worth it.

Now you can see actually it's taking a little bit longer because it's really kind of open and close

at different times now and it's finished.

And let's go to contour and we see 20,000.

This is the expected result.

No matter how many times you run it, you're going to have the same thing.

Let's delete the contour dot txt and just try it again.

So this time I can try for three different instances and I expect to see 30,000.

So if it works it's going to be 30,000 instead of 10,000 or 20,000 or any number in between.

So let's wait for a little bit more time and then we're going to see the result.

The first one finished.

Now the second one finished third one also finished.

Let's close the processes window and go to contour dot txt and we see 30,000.

That means our mutex is indeed Protecting the critical section across different processes.

One more thing I want to talk about before we finish this video is that if you have a choice between

using mutex and using monitor or lock.

So how can you choose between these techniques?

I would say that if you want to use lock to protect resources within a process, then always prefer

either lock or a monitor over a mutex.

Because mutex is considered as a operating system wide resource, it actually takes more resource to

create a mutex than to create a lock or a monitor, unless you're trying to synchronize between different

processes.

Don't use mutex, prefer lock or monitor.

And that's everything I want to cover in this video.

If any questions, please let me know.

If not, I will see you in the next one.