In this video, let's talk about reader and writer log.

Reader and writer log is yet another type of synchronization techniques to help with threads synchronization.

We already talked about a regular log in monitor a mutex.

Why do we need a reader and writer log

Let's talk about the reason behind that.

A regular log or monitor or mutex is always exclusive, which means that when a thread acquires a lock

only, this particular thread has access to the shared resource within the critical section.

However, in some cases we want multiple threads read the shared resource at the same time because reading

doesn't cause any change.

And when multiple threads are reading a shared resource at the same time, it wouldn't cause risk conditions

and we use a regular lock, then the performance of the application will be hindered.

So if we look at this application, for example, we have a shared resource over here.

So this is the shared resource and the application is a multi-threading application.

And we use different threads.

So let's say this is a reader thread.

I'm going to use R in the circle to represent a reader thread.

So it could be a reader thread.

And there could be multiple reader threads because we just need to read the resource at the same time

and make decisions.

So multiple threads working together we can divide and conquer.

So it would be a great idea to improve the performance with multiple reader threads.

And there are other types of threads which could be writer threads, which is responsible for writing

to the shared resource.

Writing includes making changes like deleting or update or add to the shared resource.

So I'm just using W to include all of those possibilities.

And of course there could be reader and writer threads so the thread could be reading and writing at

the same time.

So if we have these kind of situations, then we shouldn't just use a regular lock or monitor or a mutex,

because we should allow all of this readers work at the same time.

That's why we need a special type of lock, and that's what we call the reader and writer lock.

So how does a reader and writer lock work

The reader and writer lock has to work in such a way that allows multiple readers to read the resource

simultaneously.

When one of the reader threads, for example, acquires the lock, other reader threads should be able

to acquire the lock at the same time so that they can work simultaneously.

However, when any of the reader threads is holding onto the lock, the writer cannot actually do anything

right.

So the lock is a shared lock between the readers, but it's a exclusive lock against the writers.

Now, when a writer is holding a lock, then dialogue is a absolute exclusive lock, which means any

of the other threads, regardless of the types of the threads, cannot access the shared resource anymore.

So this is the reader and writer lock in reality.

Is there any possibilities that we use the reader and writer lock

Yes, we use them quite a lot.

For example, in database systems we have a database over here.

Let's say this is Microsoft SQL server.

It doesn't really matter.

Any type of database would have to implement similar mechanism for thread synchronization, because

a server is hosted on a central place, and multiple applications across the internet should be able

to access the database at the same time.

The request sent to the SQL server.

Each request is always independent, so to the SQL server itself, these requests generates concurrent

access to the server.

So therefore if there is a database table that that needs to be accessed by all of these different applications,

and each one of them can be reading and writing or just read or just write or read and write at the

same time.

Then similar type of locks reader lock, reader and writer lock should be applied, right

And if you have worked with SQL server before, you probably have heard of shared locks and exclusive

locks.

So when a Select statement is executed, a shared lock is applied to a certain area of the table.

So in SQL server, the lock is more granular.

If there's rows you can lock there's pages you can lock.

There's different areas you can lock.

So select statement will generate a shared lock.

Whereas a update statement or insert statement or delete statement.

Will generate exclusive lock.

So a shared lock would be similar to the locks acquired by the readers, whereas the exclusive lock

would be similar to the locks acquired by the writer.

So this is a real world example where reader and reader lock needs to be used.

Another example it could be a web server.

Let's say this is the web server, and the web server can be accessed by people from different places

using their browsers.

So let's say there are multiple users accessing the web server at the same time.

So in order to improve the performance, the web server loads some configuration information into the

memory and stored globally in the cache.

Use this rectangle to represent the shared cache.

So this is a shared cache, and each time when the user sends a request to the web server and the web

server needs to access the shared cache, there could be a rating and it could be a writing possibility.

So when all of them have different possibilities, whether it's reading or writing, then we encounter

the same situation as this one.

Why

That's because in web server, usually when one request is sent to a web server, it's queued in the

request queue, as we have implemented before, right

We have been simulating the web server with multi-threading programming, although we just created a

console application.

But it's very similar concept, right.

So the requests are queued, and then the requests are distributed among different threads for handling

the requests simultaneously.

Because different requests could require reading or writing, therefore a similar type of lock needs

to be in place.

We need reader and writer lock to lock the shared resource, which is the shared cache that will allow

readers to read at the same time, but allow writers to gain exclusive access to the shared cache.

This will guarantee the integrity of the shared resource.

Same thing.

This technique will guarantee the integrity of the data within the SQL server database.

So that's the theory.

So now let's now let's take a look at one example that is used for this particular scenario where we

want to use a cache.

And before we go into the code I want to give some more information.

So usually the configuration data could be stored in a file or it could be stored in a database.

Sometimes you may find that loading the configuration data from the database or from a file into a shared

cache within the memory of the application.

The web application is a good idea.

For example, if every request tends to access configuration data, then just load it into the memory.

It would improve the performance a lot, because it would decrease the number of round trips between

the web server and the database, or from the web server to a file you don't want to read and write

all the time, just put it into the cache and then eventually dump that cache into the file or back

to the database.

So it could be a good idea to to load everything into the shared cache.

In this example, especially when there could be reading requests and there could be writing requests,

then in that case, we should apply the reader and writer log.

So let's take a look at examples where we don't apply the reader and writer log first and see what potentially

could happen.

So let's jump into Visual Studio.

Close this and try to close this solution.

And let's create a new project.

And let's call this.

So still select Console Application.

And let's call this Reader Writer Lock.

So if I create a class here I'm going to call it public Class Global Cache or call it Global Configuration

Cache.

Then the purpose here is to just cache the key value pairs in a dictionary.

So I'm going to create a dictionary here with a integer as a key and a string as the value.

So the cache would be like this.

And we're going to the instantiate the instance here.

Now we have a add method here that allows us to enter the key and value.

Visual studio generated code for me.

And now for reading we just use get and with the key.

And here we just return it.

So that's it.

Quite simple.

Maybe this could cause issues.

So let's use a safer technique.

So I'm going to say cache dot try get value.

So we try to get value of this particular key out for into the value variable.

And if it's successful then we're going to return this value variable as the result.

Otherwise maybe we just return null instead of empty.

So then here we can use a question mark.

All right.

So this looks like it's going to work quite well for our purpose.

And indeed if you try this in your web application you might be using it.

No problems.

but once in a while there could be weird errors in consistent state.

Why this is happening

Well, it's really because that these requests that comes from different users comes to come to the

web server at the same time that is handled by different threads from a.

Net thread pool.

So because it's handled by different threads, they can be running in parallel, simultaneously running

in different core of the CPU.

Therefore, they might be accessing the dictionary at the same time.

So there could be different threads reading and writing at the same time.

And because the dictionary itself is not actually thread safe, right

We haven't talked about thread safety for data structures, but the easy way to understand the thread

safety problem is that this particular operation looks like one line of code.

This one also looks like one line.

One line of code.

They're not really atomic.

We talk about atomic operation before, right

So they're not really atomic.

So if this is atomic, absolutely executed or not executed, then this implementation would have no

problems.

However, these are not atomic operations, so they are broken into different parts when the compiler

compiles the code.

So therefore when multiple threads are running them, you might just run into inconsistent state against

the dictionary because the dictionary itself handles the the state within the data data struct.

Therefore, when multiple threads are running at the same time and running with different parts of of

this operation, it just could really mess up the state of this particular dictionary.

And eventually we're going to talk about concurrent data structures.

And there is a particular one that is called concurrent dictionary.

If we use concurrent dictionary then then we don't actually need to do anything.

But if we use a regular dictionary then we have to use locks to protect it.

But we can't use a regular lock like this, right

We cannot use a lock like this.

We cannot use a lock like this or it's going to compile.

It doesn't complain.

But for your reader, threads will not be able to access the cache at the same time.

And if your web server is quite popular, a lot of users are using it, then you might run into performance

issues.

So what's recommended is the reader and writer lock.

And the syntax is quite similar to the mutex or the monitor.

So let's try to use the reader and writer Rotor lock.

So what we can do here is we can, first of all, declare a reader-writer lock.

It's better to use a slim version.

So we create a new instance of this lock.

And then when we are trying to do anything with it, let's say we're trying to add to it.

We just say lock dot, enter, write lock because this is add and add or update actually.

So here it's doing add or update.

Then in this case we're entering into a write lock.

So this is going to be the exclusive lock.

And we don't need the curly braces.

Let's delete them.

And here we're going to say finally don't forget to exit.

And then over here we're going to do the same thing.

So let's remove this code.

And then we are going to say lock.

And this time we're going to say enter read lock.

So this is going to be a shared lock between the readers.

And then same thing here.

We're going to put a try catch and we're going to say finally read log.

So when we are using the reader and writer log this way, then when the web application is using them,

we're going to allow different reader threads to just access the cache simultaneously, whereas it's

going to always block the writer log.

And when the writer log gains access, it's going to block any of the other threads.

So there's only just one thing that we need to pay attention here.

What if this throws exception before it's successfully gain or acquire the lock.

So this throws exception without gaining or acquiring the lock.

And then we still tries to exit the log.

Then that could be potential issues.

So for that we can use a technique like this.

So I'm going to say uh, lock acquired equals false at the beginning.

Right.

And if the line can be executed so this line can be executed, that means we successfully acquired the

lock.

So we turn it into true.

And then finally here we are going to check whether the lock has been acquired or not.

So I'm going to say if lock acquired then we are going to exit the reader lock.

So same technique can be applied here.

Again lock acquired set to true over here.

And if the lock is actually acquired then we're going to exit the read lock.

So this would be a thread safe global global configuration cache that can be used within your web application

that allows multiple readers and a unique writer in a given type.

Okay, that's everything I want to cover in this video.

If any questions, please let me know If not, I will see you in the next one.