In this video, let's talk about some basic concepts including CPU, application, thread and thread

scheduler so that we can have a basic solid foundation in order to understand multi-threading and asynchronous

programming, and be able to create multi-threading programs and or asynchronous programs.

So for any modern computer, we will have to have a CPU, which is the central control unit that processes

all the applications.

Without the CPU, none of the application will be able to run, so the computer wouldn't exist.

So let's find a icon of CPU.

Okay, so we have a CPU here for the developer or any user.

One of the most important thing is the application.

That's the whole purpose of having a computer.

So let's imagine this rectangle represents a application.

And when you have the CPU and then have the application loaded into the memory of the computer, then

when the application wants to run the application have to be processed by the CPU.

However, the CPU can only process a thread, so the thread is the basic unit that can run within a

CPU, not the application.

So therefore one application has at least one thread.

It's impossible that application doesn't have a thread without a thread.

Application wouldn't even exist.

It wouldn't perform its task.

So let's use a circle to represent a thread within the application.

And let's imagine there's only one thread in a application that's the normal application.

It's normal application only have one thread, which usually we call the main thread, or we call it

a primary thread.

All right.

So we have an application and we have this main thread.

And when the application is loaded into the memory of the computer and wants to run, then the thread

has to be assigned to the CPU.

And the CPU will process the application.

So who is responsible for assigning the threat to the application.

And that's something we call the thread scheduler.

Now let's use another rectangle to represent the thread scheduler.

And I'm going to just call it thread scheduler here.

The thread scheduler is this middle person that looks at the available applications, and then assign

this thread to the CPU so that the CPU can take care of the thread.

Remember the key concept here to the CPU application doesn't exist to the CPU, only thread exists.

Thread is the basic unit that a CPU can process.

So the thread scheduler here is responsible to assign a thread to the CPU.

Now it's possible that we have multiple applications.

In fact, that's most of the case.

You have multiple applications running within the computer.

So when that is the case we use multiple rectangles to represent this scenario.

Rectangle represents application.

And remember that we have to have a thread inside the application in order for the application to run.

So when that's the case the this thread scheduler will have to decide which one of the threads can be

assigned to the CPU to run.

Not all of the threads can be assigned to the CPU at the same time.

Imagine there's only a single core CPU.

So at any given moment, there's only one thread can be allocated to the CPU for the CPU to process.

So the schedulers responsibility is to determine who needs to be assigned to the CPU.

The scheduler make the decision based on many different factors.

For example, some of the applications is more mission critical than other applications, so therefore

their thread has higher priorities.

And another factor could be that let's say this is a high priority thread.

Therefore it is assigned to the CPU.

But it's been using the CPU for a long time and the other threads are being starved.

So in that case the thread scheduler will have to remove this thread from the CPU and start giving other

threads some opportunities to be processed in the CPU.

So the task scheduler essentially is assigning the thread in this case based on time slicing, which

means that each thread has a period of time which we call time slice.

And during that period of time, the thread will be assigned to the CPU.

In order to run.

So this is the basic algorithms that a thread scheduler uses in order to process different threads within

different applications.

Now, the thread scheduler is not something that a developer is able to influence, other than assigning

some priorities to your own thread.

The thread scheduler is a part of the operating system.

It's part of our developer control, so you have to be aware of that.

Now we have multiple applications and we have one thread in each application.

This is not a multithreading scenario.

This is multiple application scenario.

When we talk about multi threading scenario we're referring to that the possibility of having multiple

threads within one application.

Let's say the first application utilizes three different threads.

Therefore, we call.

The first application is a multithreading program or multithreading application.

But to the scheduler there's a total of five different threads.

So 1234, five, five different threads in the entire operating system.

It doesn't really matter whether the threads belong to this application or not.

To the thread scheduler, the only thing it sees are the different threads.

So whether there's only one thread or there's a thousand threads, whether those are thousand threads

belongs to one application or belong to many different applications, it doesn't really matter.

Thread scheduler is just doing its work based on its own algorithms, and assign those threads to the

CPU to be processed, so each one of those threads will have its turn to go onto the CPU.

And of course, you will have scenarios where you have multiple cores of CPU, not just single core.

Then here we can use different icons of the CPU to represent the different cores, and it's exactly

the same thing.

The stress scheduler, which is part of the operating system, will be dealing with assigning different

threads to different cores of the CPU, but it's only that this time the thread scheduler will be able

to assign one thread per core.

But as for how it is done, it is entirely up to the thread scheduler and we don't need to worry about

that.

We just need to know that there is the thread scheduler taking care of the threads within our applications.

And when there are multiple threads within one application, we're going to call this a multi threading

scenario for this application.

This is a multi threading program whereas this is just a regular single threading application.

This one is also a regular single thread application okay.

Those are the main basic concepts.

We need to know before we start programming multi threading programs.

If any questions please let me know.

If not I will see you in the next video.